Title: Unsupervised Machine Learning for Adaptive Immune Receptors with immuneML

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
Unsupervised Machine Learning for Adaptive Immune Receptors with immuneML 

Milena Pavlović 1,2 , Charlotte Würtzen 1, Chakravarthi Kanduri 1,2 , Maria Mamica 1,2 , Lonneke Scheffer 3, Christin Lund-Andersen 4, John Gubatan 5, Theresa Ullmann 6, Victor Greiff 7,8 , Geir Kjetil Sandve 1,2  

> 1

Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway  

> 2

RealArt Convergence Environment, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway  

> 3

Center for Vaccine Innovation, La Jolla Institute for Immunology, La Jolla, San Diego, CA, USA  

> 4

Department of Tumor Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway  

> 5

Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA  

> 6

Institute of Clinical Biometrics, Center for Medical Data Science, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria  

> 7

Department of Immunology, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway  

> 8

Imprint Labs, LLC. New York, NY, USA 

Abstract 

Machine learning (ML) enables adaptive immune receptor repertoires (AIRRs) analyses for biomarker identification and therapeutic development. With the majority of AIRR data partially or imperfectly labeled, unsupervised ML is essential for motif discovery, biologically meaningful clustering, and generation of novel receptor sequences. However, no unified framework for unsupervised ML exists in the AIRR field, hindering the assessment of model robustness and generalizability. Here, we present an immuneML release advancing unsupervised ML in the AIRR field through unified clustering workflows, interpretable generative modeling, integration with protein language model embeddings, dimensionality reduction, and visualization. We demonstrate immuneML’s utility in three use cases: (i) benchmarking generative models for epitope-specific sequence generation, assessing specificity and novelty, (ii) systematic evaluation of clustering approaches on experimental receptor sequences against biological properties, such as epitope specificity and MHC, and (iii) unsupervised analysis of an experimental AIRR dataset to examine potential confounding, a practice widespread in related fields but unexplored in AIRR analyses. 

1

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Introduction 

Adaptive immune receptors (AIRs) are proteins produced by B and T cells that recognize specific antigens (e.g., from viruses, bacteria, or cancer) and mount an immune response. A set of all AIRs in an individual constitutes an adaptive immune receptor repertoire (AIRR). It 

consists of ~10 9 unique AIRs 1–3 , indicative of both present and past immune responses. 

Understanding the rules that determine antigen binding and differentiating between AIRRs of individuals with and without certain diseases would open new opportunities for diagnostic, 

prognostic, and therapeutic applications 4.

There are a few challenges to the AIRR analysis and understanding of these rules. First, observed AIR sequences reflect the combined influence of different biological factors: antigen 

recognition and presentation 5 (e.g., via human leukocyte antigen (HLA)), V(D)J recombination 

process, cross-reactivity, high specificity, and vast diversity of the theoretical sequence space, 

and technical factors introduced during collection, sequencing and preprocessing of the data 6.

Second, while there is an increasing number of AIR(R) datasets deposited in publicly available 

databases such as VDJdb 7, IEDB 8, iReceptor 9, the datasets are often only partially labeled (e.g., 

labels are available only on the repertoire level) or they might be imperfectly annotated 10 . These 

complexities, combined with the need to simultaneously consider multiple labels (e.g., HLA restriction, epitope specificity and batch effects), motivate the use of unsupervised approaches, such as clustering and representation learning, that can identify meaningful patterns and facilitate hypothesis generation. Furthermore, suitable approaches for generative modeling, typically trained in an unsupervised manner, may allow sampling of data with desired biological properties. 

In the AIR(R) field, clustering has been used for several aims. For example, it is used to 

discover clusters of sequences with shared epitope specificity 11–16 . While specificity prediction is 

commonly formulated as a supervised learning task, clustering-based approaches remain relevant given the predominance of unlabeled AIR data, label noise, and receptor cross-reactivity, which can lead to multiple labels per receptor. Moreover, clustering may enable the identification of receptor groups associated with previously unseen epitopes. Beyond specificity prediction, clustering is used to identify receptors involved in ongoing immune 

responses 17  and identify clonally related sequences 18 . While more common in other omics 

analyses 19 , clustering may also be used to detect batch effects in AIRR data. Clustering of 

repertoires is less common, but, in principle, it could be performed in the same way given suitable repertoire representations. 

Defining AIR(R) representations is an open challenge. AIR sequence representations may be 

fixed, based on physicochemical features or sequence similarity 11,12,14,20  (e.g., full sequence 

similarity, k-mer similarity, domain-inspired similarity metrics), or learned from the data. Learned representations can arise from deep learning models trained for specific tasks, or they can be derived in a self-supervised manner without reliance on predefined labels (e.g., from autoencoders or language models). Multiple such models have been proposed, including 

immune2vec 21 , ProtTrans 22 , ESM3 23 , AbLang 24 , AntiBERTa2 25 , SCEPTR 26 , SC-AIR-BERT 27 ,

TCR-VALID 28 , BertTCR 29 , TCR-BERT 30 , and GloVe-based representations 31 . While sequence 

similarity measures are traditionally used in AIR clustering applications, integrating learned 

2

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

embeddings into a common workflow to be used with classification or clustering approaches 

might be beneficial for AIR data analysis 32 .

Repertoire representations are usually either summary statistics of sequences in the 

repertoire 33,34  or a subset of relevant sequences 35–37 . While repertoires are increasingly used for 

diagnostic purposes 4,38–43 , unsupervised repertoire analyses are less common. 

Generative models have been employed to create new AIR(R) data. Some models follow the 

biological process of generating naive AIRs (OLGA 44 , IGoR 45 ), the selection process (soNNia 46 ), 

or the biological process followed by sequencing artefacts for benchmarking purposes 47 . Other 

models rely on variational autoencoders 48  or other deep learning models for generating immune 

repertoires 49  or epitope-specific receptor sequences 50–53 .

Despite recent advances in embeddings and algorithms, evaluating unsupervised approaches for both clustering and sequence generation remains challenging. Model selection for clustering and validation of clustering results is inherently difficult due to the lack of external supervision 

and many possible definitions of “true clusters” 54 . In bioinformatics applications, clustering often 

relies on single datasets and potentially misleading metrics 55–57 , without established processes 

for repeated runs or stability analyses. Furthermore, the evaluation of generative models is hindered by incomplete knowledge of biological rules, high dimensionality of the data, limited size of available datasets compared to the possible sequence space, high cost of experimental validation, and lack of standardized evaluation metrics capable of capturing different aspects of the generated sequences. 

Collectively, these challenges underscore the need for systematic frameworks that enable comparison of unsupervised ML models across diverse feature representations, support robust exploratory analyses, incorporate stability assessment and validation of both results and model choice, provide a multitude of evaluation criteria, and facilitate seamless integration with downstream ML approaches. 

To address these challenges, we introduce a unified framework for unsupervised ML analysis in the AIR(R) settings, integrated with and expanding the immuneML platform that was hitherto limited to (a broad range of) supervised ML analyses. To provide better insights into the generalizability and robustness of clustering results, the new release of the immuneML platform 

implements model selection for clustering based on stability assessment 58  and 

resampling-based estimates of internal and external validation indices 59 . To validate clustering 

on a separate dataset, immuneML additionally implements the clustering validation framework 

formalized by Ullmann and colleagues 60 . To improve the interpretability of AIR generative 

models, it provides a generative modeling workflow along with visualization tools for comparing original and generated receptor sequences across multiple domain-specific criteria. The platform also integrates existing AIR clustering approaches, generative models, and embeddings based on protein language models (PLMs) into a unified framework, enabling reproducible and transparent analyses. Finally, we demonstrate the applicability of these workflows in three use cases: (i) benchmarking three generative models on simulated epitope-specific AIR sequences with known ground-truth signals determining the epitope specificity, (ii) exploring how experimental AIR sequences cluster with respect to known 

3

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

biological properties with simulated datasets providing a baseline, and, finally, (iii) employing unsupervised ML to investigate potential confounders in an experimental AIRR dataset. 

Figure  1 Overview of new immuneML features for dataset exploration and unsupervised machine learning 

analysis. A . The platform takes AIR(R) dataset and an analysis specification as input, performs the analysis and produces an HTML report as output. New features supporting unsupervised ML analyses include training generative 

sequence models, clustering analyses, LIgO integration 61  for simulation of AIR(R) datasets, extended reporting for 

exploratory analyses, dimensionality reduction, new embeddings based on protein-language models. B. Focusing on clustering analysis, we illustrate the difference between clustering method, clustering result, and clustering approach. 

C. The clustering workflow in immuneML consists of three steps: preparation of separate discovery and validation datasets, model selection on discovery data and clustering validation on validation data. Model selection in the 

second step is based on the stability of the clustering 58 , validation indices across discovery data subsets 59  and 

visualizations. Validation of the clustering is performed on separate validation data following the framework outlined 

by Ullmann and colleagues 60 , offering result-based and method-based validation. 

Results 

immuneML is an open-source software platform for machine learning analysis of AIR(R) data 62 ,

with a strong focus on transparency and reproducibility of analyses. The original version supported multiple input formats, preprocessing, domain-specific encodings, and a classification workflow with model selection and assessment via a nested cross-validation scheme. The main 

4

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

applications were repertoire and receptor sequence classification (e.g., for disease diagnostics). This platform release extends these options to clustering workflows (e.g., for patient stratification, sequence specificity prediction, confounder analysis), generative models (e.g., for design of epitope-specific receptor sequences), embeddings based on protein language models 

(PLMs), and dimensionality reduction for data visualization and exploratory analysis ( Figure  1a). 

Generative models of adaptive immune receptor sequences focus on sequence simulation for benchmarking purposes or designing sequences with desired properties, like antigen specificity 

or developability parameters 63,64 . Some such models are already available as independent 

tools 52,53 . However, it is important to examine these models and generated sequences to 

evaluate the learned models and to provide potential biological insights into the analyzed sequence sets. For that purpose, we introduce a workflow for generative models that can be easily combined with various data visualizations and statistical analysis reports. Further, we 

integrated the following models into our platform: SoNNia 46 , LSTM 50,51 , VAE 48 , ProGen2 65 .

Additionally, the LIgO tool for AIR(R) simulation, which allows flexible simulation of both immune 

receptors and repertoires with known and fully annotated ground truth signals 61  is integrated into 

the new immuneML version. 

Building on the ability of generative models to design AIRs, the internal representation of AIRs of these models might be useful for capturing the underlying structural and functional properties 

and can be used in downstream analyses, such as classification or visualizations 32 . For that 

purpose, immuneML integrates several data representation techniques based on protein and 

AIR-language models: ProtT5 22 , TCR-Bert 30 , and ESM3 23  are added to the Word2Vec-based 

encoding available in the original version. 

Furthermore, immuneML now features dimensionality reduction techniques such as PCA, 

t-SNE 66 , and UMAP 67 , which can be combined with various data representation methods to 

examine the properties of the analyzed dataset (e.g., for interpreting the results of generative models or clustering approaches). 

For clustering analysis of sequences and repertoires ( Figure  1c), the new immuneML version 

provides a workflow for model selection across clustering approaches, which includes encoding, dimensionality reduction method, and clustering method, along with their hyperparameters 

(Figure  1b). The model selection is based on stability assessment as proposed by Lange and 

colleagues 58 : for many repetitions, the data is split into two equal parts, the clustering approach 

is fitted to both halves and then transferred in a supervised manner from one of them to the other. The correspondence between the two sets of labels is computed and the variability of it across repetitions is reported as the stability measure. In the immuneML implementation, this 

correspondence between two sets of labels is measured using adjusted Rand index 68 . The 

model selection procedure further includes data visualizations, and reporting of internal and external validation indices (measuring quality of the clustering based on the data alone, and measuring the agreement between cluster labels and external labels, respectively) computed 

over multiple data subsets 59 . Based on this information, the user selects the clustering 

approach. The dataset used for this purpose is referred to as discovery dataset. For model validation on the validation dataset, immuneML implements the framework proposed by 

5

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Ullmann and colleagues 60 . The framework supports two types of validation: method-based and 

result-based. In method-based validation, clustering is performed independently on the discovery and validation datasets, and the results obtained for these two sets are directly compared. In result-based validation, a supervised classifier is fit to clusters determined on the discovery set and used to predict clustering on the validation set, indicating whether the clustering result is useful for the validation data. These two validation strategies provide complementary insight into the robustness and applicability of the chosen approach. 

Figure  2 Analysis of the sequences produced by different generative models in use case 1. a. The use case 

overview: from simulating signal-specific sequences using LIgO with 5 different k-mers, to training multiple generative models, to analyzing the generated sequences and comparing them to the original sequences. b. The percentage of signal-specific sequences in the datasets generated by LSTM, VAE, and PWM models out of 6000 generated sequences. The original training dataset with balanced signals is shown for reference. The plot also highlights the fraction of novel sequences vs sequences memorized from the training in the generated datasets. C. The confusion matrix of multi-class logistic regression classifier based on 4-mer frequencies shows that it is possible to distinguish between the sequences of different origin, with PWM-generated sequences standing out the most. d. UMAP visualization based on 4-mer frequencies of the datasets generated by LSTM, VAE, and PWM models, with the original train dataset shown as a reference. The original dataset and LSTM dataset overlap almost completely, while the VAE covers some areas not present in the original dataset. PWM overlaps the least, consistent with its having the lowest percentage of signal-specific sequences. 

In many omics disciplines, exploratory unsupervised approaches, such as clustering or principal component analysis, are routinely applied to explore the hidden structure of the data and examine the influence of batch effects, protocol differences, or population stratification that may 

act as confounders for the analysis 19 . Comparable analyses have not yet become standard in 

AIRR research, despite a clear need to investigate the potential sources of bias in downstream 

applications 69 . We argue that exploratory and clustering analyses provided in immuneML 

represent a starting point for such investigations in the AIRR domain. 

6

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

In addition to supporting unsupervised functionality, the new immuneML version significantly enhances the overall platform functionality available for both supervised and unsupervised 

analyses. Its new data model ( Supplementary  Figure 1 ) and data manipulation components 

internally rely on BioNumPy, an open-source Python package for efficient array programming on 

biological data 70 . This results in more extensive data validation and faster analysis. The usability 

and platform documentation have also been improved compared to the original version, through simplified installation options, new domain-specific data visualizations, tutorials, and examples. 

Use case 1: Comparison of generative models of antigen-specific TCR sequences 

Simulated data with known ground-truth properties provides a principled basis for benchmarking 

of statistical and ML methods 71,72 . Building on this premise, we demonstrate the application of 

immuneML for generative modeling in the AIR domain by training and evaluating three distinct generative models on a simulated dataset with known ground-truth signals determining the 

antigen specificity ( Figure  2a). The dataset was simulated using the LIgO 61  simulation tool and 

included 5 distinct k-mer based signals of increasing complexity (see Methods ). The generative models used were position-weight matrix (PWM), variational autoencoder (VAE) similar to 

Davidsen and colleagues 48 , and long short-term memory (LSTM) inspired by Saka, and Akbar 

and colleagues 50,51 . To assess the patterns the models learned, we generated 6000 sequences 

from each model and assessed the percentage of sequences containing the signals present in the original dataset, as well as whether the generated sequences containing those signals were 

memorized from the training set or unseen during training (novel) ( Figure  2b). Among the 

datasets generated by the models, the LSTM dataset contained 98.88% of signal-specific sequences, evenly spread across the different signals. The VAE dataset contained 74.52% of signal-specific sequences, while PWM contained only 27%. However, while the LSTM dataset contained the highest percentage of signal-specific sequences (~99%), roughly half of them were memorized (~43%). In contrast, the majority of signal-specific sequences in the VAE dataset were not present in the original dataset (~73%). The confusion matrix of a classifier trained to distinguish between sequences of different origins and UMAP visualization of 4-mer frequencies for the generated datasets additionally illustrates that while the original test dataset and LSTM dataset appear to overlap well, the VAE and, especially, the PWM datasets fall 

outside the original sequences ( Figure  2c,d). 

Use case 2: Exploring biological structure of epitope-specific TCRβ sequences using clustering 

In the second use case, we evaluated the extent to which clustering captures biologically relevant information, such as epitope specificity or HLA restriction, using a publicly available 

dataset of TCRβ sequences from IEDB 8. To do this, we explored multiple clustering approaches 

(including data encoding, optional dimensionality reduction technique, and clustering method along with their hyperparameters) across multiple data subsets to get insight into the robustness 

of the obtained results using immuneML’s clustering workflow (Figure  1c). We compared 

TCR-Bert, ProtT5, ESMC, kmer frequency-based encodings with PCA and k-means and tcrdist-based representation with hierarchical clustering with different numbers of clusters. We established a baseline performance of different approaches on four simulated datasets where we knew the characteristics guiding the clustering, and then applied it to the experimental IEDB dataset. We validated the findings on a separate experimental dataset also obtained from IEDB. 

7

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure  3 - Clustering results on the IEDB dataset in use case 2. a. Overview of the use case: one experimental 

dataset for IEDB and four synthetic datasets were analyzed in the same workflow. The dataset was first split into discovery and validation, then clustering analysis was performed on discovery data where one clustering approach was chosen for validation on the validation (held-out) data. b. Adjusted mutual information (AMI) with respect to the epitope labels was computed across discovery data subsets, encodings, clustering methods and number of clusters, where the combination of tcrdist for data representation and hierarchical clustering consistently captured most of the epitope information. c. Stability of different encodings and clustering methods on IEDB discovery data. d. Selected clustering approach (tcrdist-based encoding with hierarchical clustering with 3500 clusters) performs similarly on discovery data and on held-out IEDB dataset for both method-based and result-based validation approaches, as measured by AMI with respect to biological properties (epitope specificity and MHC allele information). 

In simulated dataset 1 (random sequences of amino acids, see Methods ) and simulated dataset 2 (OLGA-simulated TCRβ sequences with randomly assigned labels), we showed there 

is no correlation between clusters and assigned labels (Supplementary  Figure 2). Strong 

clusters in simulated datasets 3 and 4 were successfully captured by the clustering approaches 

with highest median adjusted mutual information 73  (AMI) of ~0.8 (simulated dataset 4) and ~0.5 

(simulated dataset 3), both for tcrdist-based encoding with hierarchical clustering. Stability analyses on simulated datasets 1 and 2 showed that k-mer frequency with k-means and tcrdist with hierarchical clustering had low stability in absence of any signal. TCR-Bert, ProtT5, and ESMC encodings with k-means indicated increasing stability with lower number of clusters (median adjusted Rand index goes up to ~0.5 for k=15 clusters). On simulated dataset 2 with OLGA-simulated sequences, this trend was similarly present, however, tcrdist approach exhibited higher variability, but it was still less stable than PLM-related approaches. On simulated dataset 4, stability as measured by adjusted Rand index went up to ~0.9 for the tcrdist-based approach with 100 clusters. PLM-related approaches kept the same stability as in datasets 1 and 2, while tcrdist and k-mer frequency approaches became more stable for some numbers of clusters. The stability observed with PLM-related encodings may come from the 

properties of the embedding space (explored in more details elsewhere 74 ) which produce a 

8

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

consistent structure on the data, partially independent of the data itself, especially evident from 

the analysis of simulated dataset 1 with random sequences ( Supplementary  Figure 3 ). 

In the IEDB dataset, out of the explored clustering approaches, tcrdist-based encoding with hierarchical clustering best captured the epitope and HLA information, across different cluster 

sizes. However, AMI even for this clustering approach was only ~0.14 ( Figure  3b), which is 

much smaller than AMI in simulated datasets 3 and 4 with known, strong clusters (~0.5 and 

~0.8, respectively;  Supplementary  Figure 1 ). In terms of stability, clustering approaches based 

on PLM-based embeddings and k-means were the most stable, with tcr-dist-based encoding with hierarchical clustering being comparable, while k-mer encoding with k-means was the least 

stable (Figure  3c). Due to best correspondence to the expected main biological driver of 

clustering (epitope specificity) and similar performance for other, related metadata information 

(Supplementary  Figure 4 ) and reasonable stability, we selected tcrdist-based encoding with 

hierarchical clustering (with 3500 clusters) for validation on an independent, held-out IEDB dataset. The selected approach for two labels of interest (epitope specificity and MHC allele information) performed similarly on discovery data and validation data for both method-based 

and result-based validation ( Figure  3d). 

Use case 3: Analyses of confounders in an experimental AIRR dataset 

In this use case, we demonstrated how immuneML supports exploration of confounding biases on experimental datasets. The focus of this use case is exclusively on initial explorations of potential undesired drivers of similarity, not considering any disease or treatment-related signals. 

The dataset consists of paired single-cell TCR and BCR data from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients (n=143, with Crohn’s disease (CD) n=76, and ulcerative colitis (UC) n=67) and healthy controls (n=23). The dataset includes the information on the disease status, age, sex, sequencing batch and other properties. While the primary purpose of collecting this dataset was to investigate its potential utility for disease diagnostics, in the present work, it was instead used to demonstrate the initial exploratory analysis of an experimental dataset and to assess the influence of potential confounders prior to the application of supervised ML methods for diagnostics. 

To show how the initial dataset analysis may be performed, we examined the distribution of the dataset’s external labels (disease status, age, sex, batch), their overlap, distributions of repertoire clonotype counts, gene usage, and explore dataset visualizations and feature 

comparisons for the BCR subset of the data ( Figure  4a). From this analysis, we showed that 

some batches were exclusive to a single diagnosis status ( Figure  4d) and that some of the 

batches clearly stood out ( Figure  4b). To examine if batches leave such a strong imprint on the 

repertoires as to dominate overall similarity between repertoires, we performed clustering and compared the clustering results with three external labels using adjusted mutual information 

(Figure  4e) indicating that batch effects were indeed present across clustering approaches. 

However, upon examining the stability of clustering across multiple splits using a procedure proposed by Lange and colleagues and measured by adjusted Rand index to control for chance 

(Figure  4c), all clustering results were very unstable, indicating low confidence in the clustering 

9

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

results. We further examined the correspondence between the clustering result and batch information for the most stable clustering approach (positional 3-mer frequencies with k-means with k=14), showing that none of the batches were located in a single cluster, and the batch which had majority of repertoires in a single cluster (S1B), also included only diseased 

repertoires, which could be the additional driver of the clustering results ( Figure  4f). This 

analysis indicates that while a few processing batches are associated with particular diagnosis statuses, the repertoires do not appear to inherit batch-related imprints (sequence characteristics) that would clearly distinguish them from other repertoires in the clustering analysis. It is still recommended to either correct for batch or report results stratified by batch for any subsequent supervised analysis, but the absence of prominent batch-related sequence signals indicates that both supervised and unsupervised analyses would be meaningful to perform on the full set of repertoires across batches. 

Figure  4 - Confounder analysis of an experimental AIRR dataset. a. The dataset consists of 76 Crohn’s disease 

patients, 67 patients with ulcerative colitis and 23 healthy individuals. The workflow includes initial exploratory analysis, such as label distribution, label overlap, clonotype count distribution, sequence length distribution, gene usage, dataset visualizations and feature comparisons. If necessary, a subsequent (clustering) analysis can be performed if any potential issues were identified in the exploratory analysis. b. Dataset visualization based on positional 3-mer frequencies across repertoires with non-linear principal component analysis colored by batch shows that some batches clearly stand out (S1A, S1B, S2B). None of these batches contain healthy controls. c. Clustering is performed to assess if the batch effects dominate the signal. However, the stability analysis shows that clustering is very unstable. d. Overlap between batch and disease status (Diagnosis1) labels shows that some batches contain exclusively healthy controls (S8A, S8B), exclusively diseased repertoires of either Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis, or repertoires with Crohn’s disease only (S7A, S7B). e. Adjusted mutual information measures the similarity between clustering labels across clustering approaches and different metadata labels and indicates that batch effects are consistently detected by all clustering approaches to a different extent. f. Overlap between cluster labels and batch labels for one of the data subsets for the setting that was most correlated with the batch label (3-mer frequencies with k-means with k=14) shows that while some clusters contain the data only from a single batch (e.g., cluster 3 contains only S1B), none of the batches are present in only one of the clusters. 

10 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Discussion 

Unsupervised ML is a standard approach in biological sequence analysis, where it is applied to tasks such as motif discovery, clustering of sequences or samples, dimensionality reduction for visualization or downstream analyses, and identification of potential biases. Similar applications are increasingly being explored in AIR(R) research. However, a standardized framework for unsupervised ML in AIR(R) analysis is lacking, and current practices do not consistently reflect 

established standards in unsupervised ML 75 .

Several AIR(R) analysis packages have been developed for exploratory analyses and selected 

unsupervised learning tasks 9,76–81 , focusing on preprocessing, summary statistics, diversity 

analysis, repertoire overlap, phylogenetic analysis, dimensionality reduction, visualization, and limited clustering analyses. While these tools provide valuable functionality, they do not support the systematic evaluation of unsupervised ML methods for AIR(R) data. 

immuneML addresses this gap by providing rigorous, reproducible workflows that critically assess the generalizability of unsupervised learning results, in line with established best 

practices from statistics and ML 75 . The platform emphasizes transparency and interoperability, 

offering the first unified framework for unsupervised learning in AIR(R) analysis. The latest version expands its functionality to include unsupervised workflows for training generative models, performing clustering analyses, and improving data representation and visualization, as demonstrated by the three use cases. This unification not only streamlines workflows but also improves usability, ensures comparability across studies, and supports more robust and reproducible discoveries. 

While immuneML provides a robust clustering workflow, some domain-specific clustering tools are not available on the platform due to restrictive licenses, implementation in other programming languages, lack of packaging, and dependence on older package versions. Tools such as tcrdist3 are included, and for others, compatibility is supported through common data formats. immuneML also integrates data representation options based on language models and generative models, with more models available outside the platform. Integration is straightforward, with detailed developer tutorials available in the documentation. We invite the community to contribute to the platform with new models. 

immuneML represents a step toward systematic unsupervised analyses in AIR(R) research. 

Early efforts, such as a recent benchmarking study of clustering approaches 82 , illustrate the 

potential for structured evaluation, but even these are limited in scope due to reliance on a single experimental dataset or a small set of metrics. More generally, unsupervised ML is challenging as evaluation indices might be biased, for example, favouring solutions with more 

clusters or poorly matching the domain knowledge 56,57 . Some of the concerns about the use of 

evaluation indices are also raised in the AIRR field 83 . By supporting a variety of validation 

indices, clustering stability analyses, different validation strategies, and detailed reporting, immuneML facilitates addressing this challenge. For generative models, domain-informed representations, comparisons and reporting are critical to ensure biologically meaningful results, and immuneML contributes to this effort. Together, these capabilities allow immuneML to offer 

11 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

structured workflows for supervised, unsupervised, and generative model analyses, enabling rigorous and reproducible ML applications within the AIRR field. 

Methods 

immuneML availability 

immuneML is available as a Python package on PyPI ( https://pypi.org/project/immuneML/ ). The 

code is available on GitHub ( https://github.com/uio-bmi/immuneml ). immuneML is also available 

on DockerHub (http://registry.hub.docker.com/r/milenapavlovic/immuneml ) and conda 

(https://anaconda.org/bioconda/immuneml ). 

immuneML architecture 

immuneML takes in a YAML specification as input and outputs an HTML overview of the results. In addition to the analysis results, immuneML outputs a specification file containing the resolved default parameters, enabling full reproducibility of the analysis. 

The platform was developed with the focus on extendability and interoperability: it supports a 

variety of input data formats, most notably the community AIRR format 84 , and exports the 

generated data in the same format so that it can be used by other AIRR tools. All intermediate results, raw data behind the generated plots, predictions made by the models, and the models themselves are also exported. 

immuneML’s internal data representation offers two options: an object-oriented view of the data 

and support for array programming based on the BioNumPy library 70  (Supplementary  Figure 1 ). 

The analyses are organized into instructions that include: classifier selection and assessment workflow (TrainMLModel), application of trained classifiers to new datasets (ApplyMLModel), preprocessing, encoding and visualizations of datasets (ExploratoryAnalysis), training generative model with optional post-analysis (TrainGenModel), generation of sequences using an already trained model (ApplyGenModel), the clustering workflow described in Results 

(Clustering), a convenience instruction for constructing smaller datasets (Subsampling), simulation of AIR(R)s with known ground-truth immune signals (LigoSimulation), and an instruction to assess the feasibility of the simulation with LIgO (FeasibilitySummary). 

Machine learning models, encodings, and reports in immuneML implement the corresponding abstract classes, which define the functions and arguments necessary for the new classes to work seamlessly with the rest of the platform. In existing implementations, immuneML relies 

heavily on general data processing, visualization, and ML libraries such as PyTorch 85 ,

scikit-learn 86 , transformers 87 , pandas 88 , NumPy 89 , scipy 90 , gensim 91 , and Plotly 92 .

To extend the platform with new ML methods, data encodings, and reports, we provide detailed 

developer documentation ( https://docs.immuneml.uio.no/latest/developer_docs.html ). 

Use cases 

Use case 1 : Benchmarking generative models on ground-truth synthetic data 

To demonstrate the utility of immuneML for training and evaluating generative models, and to highlight how the platform enables impartial and reproducible method comparisons, we 

12 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

benchmarked three different families of generative models on synthetic data with known ground-truth immune signals. The original sequence dataset was created using immuneML’s 

LIgO simulation instruction, employing OLGA 44  to generate the background 20,000 human TCR 

beta amino acid sequences. Five immune signals of varying motif complexity were incorporated during simulation through rejection sampling. The signals included both contiguous and gapped motif patterns, ranging from 3- to 5-mers: DEQ, GQET, NQPQH, AS–G, and SS-GT . Each motif was found in 4,000 receptor sequences, resulting in equal representation of all signals. The dataset was split to preserve signal proportions between train and test sets, where 70% of sequences were used for training. 

For benchmarking, we fitted three representative generative methods: a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model, a Variational Autoencoder (VAE), and a Position Weight Matrix (PWM) as a statistical baseline. From each trained model, we sampled 6,000 sequences and assessed model performance by comparing generated distributions against both train and test distributions using domain-specific exploratory analyses. 

To evaluate how well the models capture the respective immune signals of different complexities, we used immuneML’s built-in true motifs summary barplot report, which quantifies the frequency of generated sequences containing the ground-truth motifs. This analysis further distinguishes between memorized sequences (exact matches to training data) and novel 

sequences (previously unseen in training). 

Additional analyses compared the feature distributions derived from different k-mer encodings, providing complementary perspectives on how well each model reproduced relevant sequence properties across signal types. 

Use case 2: Exploring biological structure of epitope-specific TCRβ sequences using clustering 

To demonstrate the utility of immuneML's clustering workflow, we performed cluster validation analysis on both experimental and synthetic data. Below, we describe the datasets, clustering approaches, validation indices, and experiments performed. 

Datasets . We perform the analysis on five datasets, one experimental and four simulated: 

● IEDB dataset: ~48000 human TCRβ sequences downloaded from the IEDB database (February 2nd, 2026) binding to 69 different epitopes, sourced from 50 different antigens from 19 different organisms. 

● Simulated dataset 1: 10000 random amino acid sequences with no biological interpretation of length 14 or 15, with 20 different randomly-assigned labels with uniform probability. 

● Simulated dataset 2: ~24000 TCRβ sequences from the OLGA model with randomly assigned labels that correspond to metadata available in the IEDB dataset. 

● Simulated dataset 3: ~22000 TCRβ CDR3 sequences with 20 clusters of approximately equal size, where each cluster is enriched for one of the 20 randomly selected 4-mers. On average, approximately ~50% sequence similarity is observed within each cluster. The dataset is simulated using LIgO tool available in immuneML. 

13 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

● Simulated dataset 4: ~15000 TCRβ CDR3 sequences with 15 strong clusters of approximately equal size, where each cluster is enriched for one of the 15 pairs of 4-mers (i.e., each sequence contains 1 of the 15 pairs of 4-mers). On average, approximately 75% sequence similarity is observed within each cluster. The dataset is simulated using LIgO tool available in immuneML. 

Clustering approaches. We used multiple combinations of encodings, clustering methods, and a predefined number of clusters, resulting in a large number of clustering approaches. The immune receptor sequences were encoded into numerical vectors or pre-computed distances 

using a variety of approaches, including different protein language models (Prot-5 22 , ESMC 93 ), 

fine-tuned language models for TCRs (TCR-BERT 30 ), k-mer frequencies, and pre-computed 

distances using tcrdist3 13 . Except for pre-computed distances, the encoded data is reduced to 

fewer dimensions using PCA. k-means and complete-linkage agglomerative clustering have been used to cluster the encoded data into a pre-specified number of clusters (n = 15, 100, 500, 1000, 3500). 

Validation indices. To assess the quality of clustering results, we used external validation indices to measure how well the clusters capture the available biological or external information. For this purpose, we used adjusted mutual information score (AMI), which measures the amount 

of information shared between two clusterings 73 . AMI is adjusted for chance and can thus be 

safely used for cluster validation analysis. For stability assessment, we used adjusted Rand 

index 68 . To measure the quality of the clustering results, we additionally report Silhouette and 

Calinski-Harabasz scores. 

Analyses . The analyses are performed in three steps for each of the datasets: (i) splitting the dataset into discovery and validation subsets, with 50% split between the subsets, (ii) running clustering on the discovery data for all clustering approaches and reporting the full results across external metadata available for the dataset, internal indices and stability analyses, and (iii) validating the clustering by applying a selected clustering approach to the validation data (method-based validation) and transferring the clusters from discovery data to validation data (result-based validation). 

Use case 3: Analyses of confounders in an experimental AIRR dataset 

Dataset . The dataset consists of paired single-cell TCR and BCR data from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients (n=143, with Crohn’s disease (CD) n=76, and ulcerative colitis (UC) n=67) and healthy controls (n=23) in AIRR data format. For the subsequent analyses, we focus on BCR data. 

Clustering approaches . To encode the data, we used positional and non-positional 3-mer frequencies. For dimensionality reduction, we used PCA with radial basis function kernel. For clustering methods, we used k-means where k was varied to correspond to the expected number of clusters (2 if clustering by sex, 3 if by disease status, 14 if by batch, or 30 in case a finer-grained clustering was beneficial). 

14 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Analyses . We conducted four different analyses of this dataset: (i) filtering the dataset to contain only BCRs as the repertoire files included a few of TCR sequences, (ii) exploratory analysis to examine the distribution of metadata labels, overlap of different labels (batch, diagnosis, sex), clonotype counts across disease statuses and batches, Shannon diversity, sequence length distribution by disease status and locus, gene usage distribution, (iii) exploratory analysis of encoded repertoires using positional 4-mer frequencies, non-positional 3-mer frequencies, in combination with non-linear PCA for dimensionality reduction for dataset visualization highlighted by different metadata labels of interest. Finally, seeing that there is a potential for confounding by the sequencing batch, we ran a clustering analysis in which we explored different encoding, dimensionality reduction and clustering methods to assess the degree to which the clustering is guided by the sequencing batch, as described under 

Clustering approaches . We performed clustering stability analyses and method-based and 

result-based validation as described in Results and by Ullmann and colleagues 60 .

Data availability 

The specification files and instructions how to reproduce the results for all three use cases are available in a dedicated GitHub repository 

(https://github.com/immuneML/immuneML-unsupervisedML-usecases ). The data and results for 

the use cases are available on Zenodo at 10.5281/zenodo.19564623 (use case 1) and 10.5281/zenodo.19565450 and 10.5281/zenodo.19590967 (use case 2). The dataset used in use case 3 is a part of the manuscript in preparation and will be made public along with the results upon submission of that manuscript. 

Code availability 

The immuneML source code is openly available on GitHub ( github.com/uio-bmi/immuneML )

under a free software license (AGPL-3.0). The immuneML Python package can be downloaded 

from  pypi.org/project/immuneML .

References 

1.  Lythe, G., Callard, R. E., Hoare, R. L. & Molina-París, C. How many TCR clonotypes 

does a body maintain? J. Theor. Biol. 389, 214–224 (2016). 

2.  Mora, T. & Walczak, A. M. How many different clonotypes do immune repertoires 

contain? Curr. Opin. Syst. Biol. 18, 104–110 (2019). 

3.  Briney, B., Inderbitzin, A., Joyce, C. & Burton, D. R. Commonality despite exceptional 

diversity in the baseline human antibody repertoire. Nature 566, 393–397 (2019). 

4.  Mhanna, V. et al. Adaptive immune receptor repertoire analysis. Nat. Rev. Methods 

Primer 4, 1–25 (2024). 

5.  Pishesha, N., Harmand, T. J. & Ploegh, H. L. A guide to antigen processing and 

presentation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 22, 751–764 (2022). 

6.  Barennes, P. et al. Benchmarking of T cell receptor repertoire profiling methods reveals 

large systematic biases. Nat. Biotechnol. 39, 236–245 (2021). 

7.  Bagaev, D. V. et al. VDJdb in 2019: database extension, new analysis infrastructure and 

a T-cell receptor motif compendium. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, D1057–D1062 (2020). 

15 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8.  Vita, R. et al. The Immune Epitope Database (IEDB): 2024 update. Nucleic Acids Res. 

53, D436–D443 (2025). 

9.  Corrie, B. D. et al. iReceptor: a platform for querying and analyzing antibody/B-cell and 

T-cell receptor repertoire data across federated repositories. Immunol. Rev. 284, 24–41 (2018). 

10.  Messemaker, M. et al. A functionally validated TCR-pMHC database for TCR specificity 

model development. 2025.04.28.651095 Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.28.651095 

(2025). 

11.  Huang, H., Wang, C., Rubelt, F., Scriba, T. J. & Davis, M. M. Analyzing the 

Mycobacterium tuberculosis immune response by T-cell receptor clustering with GLIPH2 and 

genome-wide antigen screening. Nat. Biotechnol. 1–9 (2020) doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0505-4. 

12.  Dash, P. et al. Quantifiable predictive features define epitope-specific T cell receptor 

repertoires. Nature 547, 89–93 (2017). 

13.  Mayer-Blackwell, K. et al. TCR meta-clonotypes for biomarker discovery with tcrdist3 

enabled identification of public, HLA-restricted clusters of SARS-CoV-2 TCRs. eLife 10, e68605 

(2021). 

14.  Girgis, A. A. et al. Comparative assessment of physiochemical metrics for the clustering 

of adaptive immune receptor repertoires. Nucleic Acids Res. 53, gkaf1156 (2025). 

15.  Gielis, S. et al. Revealing the hidden sequence distribution of epitope-specific TCR 

repertoires and its influence on machine learning model performance. 2024.10.21.619364 

Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.21.619364 (2024). 

16.  Mayer, A. & Callan, C. G. Measures of epitope binding degeneracy from T cell receptor 

repertoires. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 120, e2213264120 (2023). 

17.  Pogorelyy, M. V. et al. Detecting T cell receptors involved in immune responses from 

single repertoire snapshots. PLOS Biol. 17, e3000314 (2019). 

18.  Gupta, N. T. et al. Hierarchical Clustering Can Identify B Cell Clones with High 

Confidence in Ig Repertoire Sequencing Data. J. Immunol. 198, 2489–2499 (2017). 

19.  Leek, J. T. et al. Tackling the widespread and critical impact of batch effects in 

high-throughput data. Nat. Rev. Genet. 11, 733–739 (2010). 

20.  Gielis, S. et al. Detection of Enriched T Cell Epitope Specificity in Full T Cell Receptor 

Sequence Repertoires. Front. Immunol. 10, (2019). 

21.  Ostrovsky-Berman, M., Frankel, B., Polak, P. & Yaari, G. Immune2vec: Embedding B/T 

Cell Receptor Sequences in ℝN Using Natural Language Processing. Front. Immunol. 12, 

(2021). 

22.  Elnaggar, A. et al. ProtTrans: Toward Understanding the Language of Life Through 

Self-Supervised Learning. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 44, 7112–7127 (2022). 

23.  Hayes, T. et al. Simulating 500 million years of evolution with a language model. Science 

387, 850–858 (2025). 

24.  Olsen, T. H., Moal, I. H. & Deane, C. M. AbLang: an antibody language model for 

completing antibody sequences. Bioinforma. Adv. 2, vbac046 (2022). 

25.  Barton, J., Galson, J. D. & Leem, J. Enhancing Antibody Language Models with 

Structural Information. in (2024). doi:10.1101/2023.12.12.569610. 

26.  Nagano, Y. et al. Contrastive learning of T  cell receptor representations. Cell Syst. 16, 

101165 (2025). 

16 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27.  Zhao, Y. et al. SC-AIR-BERT: a pre-trained single-cell model for predicting the 

antigen-binding specificity of the adaptive immune receptor. Brief. Bioinform. 24, bbad191 

(2023). 

28.  Leary, A. Y. et al. Designing meaningful continuous representations of T cell receptor 

sequences with deep generative models. Nat. Commun. 15, 4271 (2024). 

29.  Zhang, M. et al. BertTCR: a Bert-based deep learning framework for predicting 

cancer-related immune status based on T cell receptor repertoire. Brief. Bioinform. 25, bbae420 

(2024). 

30.  Wu, K. E. et al. TCR-BERT: learning the grammar of T-cell receptors for flexible 

antigen-binding analyses. in Proceedings of the 18th Machine Learning in Computational 

Biology meeting 194–229 (PMLR, 2024). 

31.  Chapfuwa, P. et al. Scalable Universal T-Cell Receptor Embeddings from Adaptive 

Immune Repertoires. in (2024). 

32.  Wang, M., Patsenker, J., Li, H., Kluger, Y. & Kleinstein, S. H. Language model-based B 

cell receptor sequence embeddings can effectively encode receptor specificity. Nucleic Acids 

Res. 52, 548–557 (2024). 

33.  Kanduri, C. et al. Profiling the baseline performance and limits of machine learning 

models for adaptive immune receptor repertoire classification. GigaScience 11, giac046 (2022). 

34.  Emerson, R. O. et al. Immunosequencing identifies signatures of cytomegalovirus 

exposure history and HLA-mediated effects on the T cell repertoire. Nat. Genet. 49, 659–665 

(2017). 

35.  Widrich, M. et al. Modern Hopfield Networks and Attention for Immune Repertoire 

Classification. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33, (2020). 

36.  Sidhom, J.-W., Larman, H. B., Pardoll, D. M. & Baras, A. S. DeepTCR is a deep learning 

framework for revealing sequence concepts within T-cell repertoires. Nat. Commun. 12, 1605 

(2021). 

37.  Hajj, G. S. A. et al. Incorporating probabilistic domain knowledge into deep multiple 

instance learning. in Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning 

17279–17297 (PMLR, 2024). 

38.  Stervbo, U. et al. Challenges and future directions of AIRR-seq-based diagnostics. 

ImmunoInformatics 19, 100056 (2025). 

39.  Zaslavsky, M. E. et al. Disease diagnostics using machine learning of B cell and T cell 

receptor sequences. Science 387, eadp2407 (2025). 

40.  O’Donnell, T. J. et al. Reading the repertoire: Progress in adaptive immune receptor 

analysis using machine learning. Cell Syst. 15, 1168–1189 (2024). 

41.  Arnaout, R. A. et al. The Future of Blood Testing Is the Immunome. Front. Immunol. 12, 

(2021). 

42.  Semerci, A. et al. Machine learning in AIRR diagnostics: Advances and applications. 

ImmunoInformatics 20, 100062 (2025). 

43.  Rawat, P. et al. Identification of a type 1 diabetes–associated T cell receptor repertoire 

signature from the human peripheral blood. Sci. Adv. 12, eadx7448 (2026). 

44.  Sethna, Z., Elhanati, Y., Callan, C. G., Walczak, A. M. & Mora, T. OLGA: fast 

computation of generation probabilities of B- and T-cell receptor amino acid sequences and 

motifs. Bioinformatics 35, 2974–2981 (2019). 

17 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

45.  Marcou, Q., Mora, T. & Walczak, A. M. High-throughput immune repertoire analysis with 

IGoR. Nat. Commun. 9, 1–10 (2018). 

46.  Isacchini, G., Walczak, A. M., Mora, T. & Nourmohammad, A. Deep generative selection 

models of T and B cell receptor repertoires with soNNia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 118, 

e2023141118 (2021). 

47.  Konstantinovsky, T., Peres, A., Polak, P. & Yaari, G. An unbiased comparison of 

immunoglobulin sequence aligners. Brief. Bioinform. 25, bbae556 (2024). 

48.  Davidsen, K. et al. Deep generative models for T cell receptor protein sequences. eLife 

8, e46935 (2019). 

49.  Pradier, M. F. et al. AIRIVA: A Deep Generative Model of Adaptive Immune Repertoires. 

in Proceedings of the 8th Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference 588–611 (PMLR, 2023). 

50.  Akbar, R. et al. In silico proof of principle of machine learning-based antibody design at 

unconstrained scale. mAbs 14, 2031482 (2022). 

51.  Saka, K. et al. Antibody design using LSTM based deep generative model from phage 

display library for affinity maturation. Sci. Rep. 11, 5852 (2021). 

52.  Shuai, R. W., Ruffolo, J. A. & Gray, J. J. IgLM: Infilling language modeling for antibody 

sequence design. Cell Syst. 14, 979-989.e4 (2023). 

53.  Luo, S. et al. Antigen-Specific Antibody Design and Optimization with Diffusion-Based 

Generative Models for Protein Structures. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 35, 9754–9767 (2022). 

54.  Hennig, C. What are the true clusters? Pattern Recognit. Lett. 64, 53–62 (2015). 

55.  Gösgens, M. M., Tikhonov, A. & Prokhorenkova, L. Systematic Analysis of Cluster 

Similarity Indices: How to Validate Validation Measures. in Proceedings of the 38th International 

Conference on Machine Learning 3799–3808 (PMLR, 2021). 

56.  Lei, Y. et al. Ground truth bias in external cluster validity indices. Pattern Recognit. 65, 

58–70 (2017). 

57.  Gagolewski, M., Bartoszuk, M. & Cena, A. Are cluster validity measures (in) valid? Inf. 

Sci. 581, 620–636 (2021). 

58.  Lange, T., Roth, V., Braun, M. L. & Buhmann, J. M. Stability-Based Validation of 

Clustering Solutions. Neural Comput. 16, 1299–1323 (2004). 

59.  Dangl, R. & Leisch, F. Effects of Resampling in Determining the Number of Clusters in a 

Data Set. J. Classif. 37, 558–583 (2020). 

60.  Ullmann, T., Hennig, C. & Boulesteix, A.-L. Validation of cluster analysis results on 

validation data: A systematic framework. WIREs Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 12, e1444 (2022). 

61.  Chernigovskaya, M. et al. Simulation of adaptive immune receptors and repertoires with 

complex immune information to guide the development and benchmarking of AIRR machine 

learning. Nucleic Acids Res. 53, gkaf025 (2025). 

62.  Pavlović, M. et al. The immuneML ecosystem for machine learning analysis of adaptive 

immune receptor repertoires. Nat. Mach. Intell. 3, 936–944 (2021). 

63.  Bashour, H. et al. Biophysical cartography of the native and human-engineered antibody 

landscapes quantifies the plasticity of antibody developability. Commun. Biol. 7, 922 (2024). 

64.  Prihoda, D. et al. BioPhi: A platform for antibody design, humanization, and humanness 

evaluation based on natural antibody repertoires and deep learning. mAbs 14, 2020203 (2022). 

65.  Nijkamp, E., Ruffolo, J. A., Weinstein, E. N., Naik, N. & Madani, A. ProGen2: Exploring 

the boundaries of protein language models. Cell Syst. 14, 968-978.e3 (2023). 

18 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

66.  Maaten, L. van der & Hinton, G. Visualizing Data using t-SNE. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 9, 

2579–2605 (2008). 

67.  McInnes, L., Healy, J. & Melville, J. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and 

Projection for Dimension Reduction. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1802.03426 

(2020). 

68.  Hubert, L. & Arabie, P. Comparing partitions. J. Classif. 2, 193–218 (1985). 

69.  Pavlović, M. et al. Improving generalization of machine learning-identified biomarkers 

using causal modelling with examples from immune receptor diagnostics. Nat. Mach. Intell. 6, 

15–24 (2024). 

70.  Rand, K. D., Grytten, I., Pavlović, M., Kanduri, C. & Sandve, G. K. BioNumPy: array 

programming for biology. Nat. Methods 21, 2198–2199 (2024). 

71.  Sandve, G. K. & Greiff, V. Access to ground truth at unconstrained size makes simulated 

data as indispensable as experimental data for bioinformatics methods development and 

benchmarking. Bioinformatics 38, 4994–4996 (2022). 

72.  Morris, T. P., White, I. R. & Crowther, M. J. Using simulation studies to evaluate statistical 

methods. Stat. Med. 38, 2074–2102 (2019). 

73.  Vinh, N. X., Epps, J. & Bailey, J. Information Theoretic Measures for Clusterings 

Comparison: Variants, Properties, Normalization and Correction for Chance. J. Mach. Learn. 

Res. 11, 2837–2854 (2010). 

74.  Frolenkova, M. et al. Quantitative mapping of antigen specificity in adaptive immune 

repertoire embedding spaces. 2025.12.09.692930 Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.09.692930 (2025). 

75.  Van Mechelen, I. et al. A white paper on good research practices in benchmarking: The 

case of cluster analysis. WIREs Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 13, e1511 (2023). 

76.  Mhanna, V. et al. AnalyzAIRR: A user-friendly guided workflow for AIRR data analysis. 

ImmunoInformatics 19, 100052 (2025). 

77.  Shugay, M. et al. VDJtools: Unifying Post-analysis of T Cell Receptor Repertoires. PLOS 

Comput. Biol. 11, e1004503 (2015). 

78.  Waltari, E., Nafees, S., McCutcheon, K. M., Wong, J. & Pak, J. E. AIRRscape: An 

interactive tool for exploring B-cell receptor repertoires and antibody responses. PLOS Comput. 

Biol. 18, e1010052 (2022). 

79.  Vadim Nazarov, immunarch.bot & Eugene Rumynskiy. immunomind/immunarch: 0.6.5: 

Basic single-cell support. Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3893991 (2020). 

80.  Gupta, N. T. et al. Change-O: a toolkit for analyzing large-scale B cell immunoglobulin 

repertoire sequencing data. Bioinformatics 31, 3356–3358 (2015). 

81.  Vander Heiden, J. A. et al. pRESTO: a toolkit for processing high-throughput sequencing 

raw reads of lymphocyte receptor repertoires. Bioinformatics 30, 1930–1932 (2014). 

82.  Jouannet, C., Vantomme, H., Klatzmann, D. & Mariotti-Ferrandiz, E. Benchmarking 

unsupervised methods for inferring TCR specificity. 2024.10.26.620398 Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.26.620398 (2025). 

83.  Wan, Y.-T. R. & Nielsen, M. TCRCluster: a novel approach to T-cell receptor latent 

featurization and clustering using contrastive learning-guided two-stage variational 

autoencoders. NAR Genomics Bioinforma. 7, lqaf065 (2025). 

19 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

84.  Rubelt, F. et al. Adaptive Immune Receptor Repertoire Community recommendations for 

sharing immune-repertoire sequencing data. Nat. Immunol. 18, 1274–1278 (2017). 

85.  Paszke, A. et al. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning 

Library. in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (eds Wallach, H. et al.) 

8026–8037 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2019). 

86.  Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 

2825–2830 (2011). 

87.  Wolf, T. et al. HuggingFace’s Transformers: State-of-the-art Natural Language 

Processing. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1910.03771 (2020). 

88.  team, T. pandas development. pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas. Zenodo 

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16918803 (2025). 

89.  Harris, C. R. et al. Array programming with NumPy. Nature 585, 357–362 (2020). 

90.  Virtanen, P. et al. SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in Python. 

Nat. Methods 17, 261–272 (2020). 

91.  Rehurek, R. & Sojka, P. Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. in 

(2010). 

92.  Plotly Technologies Inc. Collaborative Data Science. Plotly Technologies Inc (2015). 

93.  Hayes, T. et al. Simulating 500 million years of evolution with a language model. Science 

387, 850–858 (2025). 

20 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary figures 

Supplementary  Figure 1 - Data model class diagram. There are three dataset types: SequenceDataset, 

ReceptorDataset, and RepertoireDataset for different levels of analysis. AIRRSequenceSet is a data class based on bionumpy and is used by the SequenceDataset, ReceptorDataset, and the Repertoire class to access all the AIR sequences at once. ReceptorSequence and Receptor classes are utility classes for working on the object level; however, AIRRSequenceSet is available in the same places and can be used to speed up the analyses. 

21 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary  Figure 2  - Clustering performance on simulated datasets from use case 2, as measured by adjusted 

mutual information (AMI) between a label of interest and the cluster labels obtained by a specific clustering approach, and stability (measured by adjusted Rand index (ARI)) across 5 repetitions. a. For simulated dataset 4, with 15 strong clusters, where the label of interest is simulated as a pair of 4-mers, AMI for all considered clustering approaches is higher when the number of clusters is closer to the ground truth. Stability is also higher when the number of clusters closer to 15. b. For simulated dataset 3, with 20 true clusters, where the label of interest is simulated as a single k-mer, k-mer frequency with k-means has increasing AMI as it approaches the number of true clusters. The same applies to all other clustering approaches, with the exception of tcrdist-based approach, which performs best overall, but only when the number of clusters is 500 or 1000. The stability of the clustering approaches is higher for fewer clusters, except for tcrdist-based approach which follows the opposite trend. c. For simulated dataset 2 with realistic 

22 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

OLGA-generated sequences and randomly assigned labels, AMI is close to 0 for all clustering approaches. Stability is higher for fewer clusters, but is less than stability with highly conserved clusters as shown in panel a. d. For simulated dataset 1 with random amino acid sequences and randomly assigned labels, AMI is close to 0 for all clustering approaches. Stability is higher with fewer number of clusters for clustering approaches based on protein language models, but close to 0 for k-mer frequency with k-means and for tcrdist-based approach. 

23 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary  Figure 3  - Visualization of clustering results and “true” labels across datasets provides insight into 

stability performance of protein language model-based encodings, shown here for TCR-Bert encoding, PCA with 2 components and k-means with k=15. a. Visualization of a subset of the simulated dataset 1 with random amino acid sequences and randomly assigned labels. b. Visualization of the same data as in panel a, colored by assigned cluster labels. As there is no structure in the data, the only structure present is the one imposed by encoding, which is 

results in similar clusterings by k-means and causes the high stability as seen in  Supplementary  Figure 2 d. The 

adjusted mutual information (AMI) is 2.5*10 -5 . c. Visualization of a subset of the simulated dataset 4 with amino acid motifs present in realistic TCRβ sequences, with 15 true clusters. d. Visualization of the same dataset as in c, colored by assigned cluster labels, where the true clusters are successfully recovered (AMI=0.468). e. Visualization of a subset of the IEDB dataset colored by epitope labels. f. Visualization of the same dataset as in e, colored by assigned cluster labels. While relatively stable, this clustering does not correspond well to epitope labels (AMI=0.009). 

24 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.15.718648 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary  Figure 4  - Clustering performance on IEDB data with respect to additional metadata labels indicates 

consistent performance by tcrdist-based approach across the labels. a. With respect to the epitope source molecule, the adjusted mutual information (AMI) of ~0.135 is similar to performance with respect to epitope. b. With respect to the epitope source organism, AMI of ~0.09 is lower than for epitope, but comparable. c. With respect to MHC alleles, tcrdist-based approach also captures the most information, with highest AMI ~0.04. 

26